Execution Tickets page (#169)
eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies: docs/wiki/research/PBS/ET.md

# Execution Tickets - ET

> This document is WIP and may be subjected to future updates, as the design space around ePBS, ET and Inclusion lists (IL) evolves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!WARNING]
> This document covers an active area of research, may be outdated at time of reading and subjected to future updates, as the design space around ePBS, ET and Inclusion lists (IL) evolves.
```

## Roadmap tracker

> |Upgrade|URGE|Track|Cross-references|

Reviewer: This is a nice addition but it would be ideal to have these standardized across the wiki

Author: Yes, I think a cross-wiki standardized roadmap tracker medallion would be a good addition. I'll open an issue on that if you agree

Reviewer: Great, please propose the format so other can agree on it

# Execution Tickets - ET
> [!WARNING]
> This document covers an active area of research, may be outdated at time of reading and subjected to future updates, as the design space around ePBS, ET and Inclusion lists (IL) evolves.

## Roadmap tracker

|Upgrade|URGE|Track|Cross-references|
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
|**Execution Tickets** - aliases: **Validator-Proposer** separation; **Attester-Proposer** separation|the Scourge|MEV track|ePBS, IL, PEPC, SSF|

## Relevant context
Recent proposals and development towards enshrining Proposer-Builder Separation (PBS) seek to diminish execution block construction reliance on a few centralized, off-chain entities (relays), that in the context of current MEV, act as intermediaries between Validators as payload proposers and specialized, more sophisticated block builders. Today, with MEV-boost, validators-as-proposers forfeit their rights to build execution payloads, in an open-bids permissionless auction.

**PBS structure**

> According to the EPFsg wiki page on ePBS [[1]](#resources) and Barnabe's notes on PBS [[2]](#resources), we can identify two main components of PBS:

Author: updated the local file with the proper name

a validator–proposer separation, where the proposer is recruited by the protocol and could once again delegate the role of construction to another entity, the builder.
The delivery of the beacon block, however, would remain the validator's prerogative.

![](/docs/wiki/research/img/ETvsPBS.webp)

One generalization of PBS is proposed by PEPC [[1]](#resources) [[8]](#resources) and has generated versions of ePBS, like slot-auction ePBS, which added a subtle design tweak to the block-auction ePBS (the "vanilla" ePBS version that currently has "the scene" in ethereum R&D[[9]](#resources)): the Beacon proposers can commit to execution proposers only, so there would be no commitments to the contents of the execution payload, which solves the timing games issues that the block-auction ePBS version faces. 

**block-auction ePBS vs slot-auction ePBS**

![](/docs/wiki/research/img/ba-ePBS.webp)
![](/docs/wiki/research/img/sa-ePBS.webp)

The improvement sa-ePBS brings, comes however with the technical cost of dealing with equivocations and head split views, and that [is not a trivial problem to solve](#open-issues).

**How do ET solve Timing games?**

> Timing games occur when a proposer delays as much as possible the proposing of their block in order to maximize the value it could get for it. In block-auction ePBS, as the execution payloads are determined at the release of the beacon block, the timing games will be played by validators that could attempt to delay the delivery of the beacon block for as much time as possible, in order to commit to the highest bid possible, so it would have the incentives to act rationally. This is what ET proposes, an even further consensus-execution separation, with no commitments from validator-as-proposer to the execution payload:

Author: modified the paragraph: 
**How do ET contain Timing games?**

Timing games occur when a proposer delays as much as possible the proposing of their block in order to maximize the value it could get for it. In block-auction ePBS, as the execution payloads are determined at the release of the beacon block, the timing games will be played by validators that could attempt to delay the delivery of the beacon block for as much time as possible, in order to commit to the highest bid possible.

ETs proposes, an even further consensus-execution separation to ePBS, with no commitments from validator-as-proposer to the execution payload, thus containing timing games to execution proposing phase, so that the consensus-critical functions are not subject to validators having the incentives to act rationally:

## ET flow:
Execution tickets flow for one slot is [[4]](#resources):

1. During the beacon round, the randomly selected beacon proposer has the right to propose a beacon block.
2. This proposer proposes the beacon block that contains the inclusion list.
3. The beacon attesters vote on the validity and timeliness of the beacon block.
4. During the execution round, a randomly selected execution ticket has the right to propose an execution block.
5. The owner of the ticket is the execution proposer and proposes an execution block.
6. The execution attesters vote for on the timeliness and validity of the execution block.

![](/docs/wiki/research/img/ETflow.jpeg)

## In depth analysis of ET effects
WIP
* Validating & staking
* Roadmap compatibility
* Secondary market

## Counterarguments to ET

> 1. From a censorship-resistance point of view, we may want to keep validators active in the construction of execution payloads. 

Author: rephrased the whole Counterarguments to ET heading:
## Counterarguments to ET
- C1. From a censorship-resistance point of view, we may want to keep validators active in the construction of execution payloads. 

  - counter to counterargument C1:

    CC1. Validators forego this ability entirely today when they use MEV-Boost, and could very well forego it entirely  when they would use ePBS. Improvement proposals as Inclusion lists [[6]](#resources) and Multiplicity gadgets [[7]](#resources) could remedy this by imposing on whomever owns the execution ticket with binding but non-efficiency-decreasing constraints on payload construction.

- C2. ET would no longer guarantee that Validators get the option to build execution payloads as they seem fair. 

  - counter to counterargument C2:

    CC2. The definition of fairness could be very different between Validators, and the market has revealed in practice the preference of most validators to not exercise this building right themselves, delegating the construction to other parties. 

- C3. Separating Validator and Proposer roles creates a market structure where the ticket holder could become an *active monopolist*, imposing [monopoly pricing](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12731) and possibly front-running time sensitive flow. The above is in contrast with the status quo under MEV-Boost featuring the Validator as a *passive monopolist* [[5]](#resources) in the proposer role.

  - counter to counterargument C3:

    CC3. In their work *When to Sell Your Blocks* [[5]](#resources), Quintus and Conor note that if validators tend towards rationality in the long run, the difference between validators-as-proposers and ticket-holders-as-proposers may tend to diminish a lot, meaning that the improvement of Validator-Proposer role separation could come from the benefits the separation itself can bring to ET and subsequently for the protocol, and that such a separation of roles would most likely not create a worst situation than the status quo.

1. Validators forego this ability entirely today when they use MEV-Boost, and could very well forego it entirely  when they would use ePBS. Improvement proposals as Inclusion lists [[6]](#resources) and Multiplicity gadgets [[7]](#resources) could remedy this by imposing on whomever owns the execution ticket with binding but non-efficiency-decreasing constraints on payload construction.

2. The definition of fairness could be very different between Validators, and the market has revealed in practice the preference of most validators to not exercise this building right themselves, delegating the construction to other parties. 

3. In their work *When to Sell Your Blocks* [[5]](#resources), Quintus and Conor note that if validators tend towards rationality in the long run, the difference between validators-as-proposers and ticket-holders-as-proposers may tend to diminish a lot, meaning that the improvement of Validator-Proposer role separation could come from the benefits the separation itself can bring to ET and subsequently for the protocol, and that such a separation of roles would most likely not create a worst situation than the status quo.

> 

Author: I agree. for the scope of this page, I used ETs in the more general term of validator-proposer separation mechanism. Would it be an idea to have a page dedicated to Validator-Proposer separation (e.g. eVPS), where ETs, APS Burs and other mechanisms are analyzed?
